[MUSIC]
Now we're going to talk about
another creational pattern,
the factory method pattern.
Along the way,
we will also learn about a factory object.
Just like a factory in the real world,
the purpose of these factories in object
oriented programming is to create objects.
Using factories,
makes your software easier to maintain and
change because object creation
happens in the factories.
The methods that use these factories
can focus on other behavior.
Imagine that your software
implements an online store and
that you want to create
objects to sell in that store.
Let's use a KnifeStore, for example.
There are many different types of knives,
but
let's start with SteakKnives and
ChefsKnives.
You have a superclass knife with
subclasses SteakKnife and ChefsKnife.
You write a method to order a knife,
which will first create one of these knife
objects, and then prepare it for shipment.
Let's say that the preparations it
performs on the knife are sharpen, polish,
and package.
Your method looks like this.
The method,
first declares a knife variable,
which will refer to the knife
object to be created.
The conditionals determine which subclass
of knife is actually instantiated.
The act of actually instantiating
a class to create an object of
a specific type is called
concrete instantiation.
In Java, you usually do concrete
instantiation with a new operator.
You will see on C,
that concrete instantiation will be
the primary purpose for our factories.
The next step is to call some methods that
are common to the different types of knife
objects, sharpen, polish and package.
These methods do not care what
type of knife is created,
all they want is a knife to operate on.
Imagine that your store adds more and
more knife types as its sales improve.
New subclasses are added as needed,
bread knife, paring knife, etc.
In this example,
the list of conditionals grows and
grows as new knife types are added.
Notice that what we do with a knife
after creating it doesn't change.
All of these knives need to be sharpened,
polished, and packaged.
This is all getting pretty complicated.
What if instead of making
your knives in the store,
you could make them somewhere else?
Just as in the real world,
objects are usually made in factories.
We can create a factory object,
whose role is to create product
objects of particular types.
So the sharpening, polishing and
packaging will stay where it
is in the orderKnife method.
But you will delegate the responsibility
of product object creation to
another object, a KnifeFactory.
You're going to move the code for
deciding which type of knife to create and
the code for deciding which subclass of
knife to instantiate into the class for
this factory.
The class for a KnifeFactory is shown
here with the create Knife method.
Some other code will instantiate
a KnifeFactory object, but once done,
you can use it to create knife method to
make knife objects of particular types.
This is almost the exact same code
you use to create a knife object in
the previous example.
It is just been moved into a method of
a new class called the KnifeFactory.
In general, a factory object is
an instance of such a class which has
a method to create product objects.
Now this KnifeFactory can be used by
the KnifeStore class, in other words,
the KnifeStore is now
a client of the KnifeFactory.
Look at this example.
In this example, the KnifeFactory object
here used is passed into the constructor
for the KnifeStore class.
The orderKnife method is
very similar to before.
However, instead of performing
concrete instantiation itself,
it delegates its task
to the factory object.
What have you gained?
First of all, the KnifeStore and
its orderKnife method may not be
the only client of your KnifeFactory.
Other clients, may use knife factories
to create knives for other purposes.
Maybe there's a method for
bulk orders or quality testing.
Since all of the actual knife
creation happens in the KnifeFactory,
you can simply add new knife types to
your KnifeFactory without modifying
the client code.
If there are multiple clients that want
to instantiate the same set of classes,
then by using a Factory object,
you have cut out redundant code and
made the software easier to modify.
Instead of hunting down multiple
snippets of similar instantiation code.
You can simply add or
remove the particular subclasses
to instantiate in your factory.
If you change the way that
subclasses are instantiated,
you only need to change your
factory rather than every client.
Look at the orderKnife method.
As far as it's considered, as long as it
receives a knife object from the factory,
it can satisfy it's responsibilities.
This allows the developer to make changes
to the concrete instantiation without
touching the client method.
The client method does not need
to name concrete knife classes.
And now deals with knife generalization.
This is called coding to an interface,
not an implementation.
Think of this like a real life factory.
Usually, when a store
is selling something,
like the knife in our example,
the store itself does not make that item.
Instead, the store gets their
knives from a KnifeFactory.
This KnifeFactory makes knives for
the store, but
may also have other clients,
such as other stores that need knives.
If the factory changes
the way it makes knives,
then the stores don't care as long as
they receive knives of the right type.
Perhaps the blade material changes or
the handles change shape.
These changes are made in the factory,
not in the store.
Okay, so we can use a factory object
to instantiate product objects.
Although it is a useful technique,
the Factory Object is not actually one
of the gang of four design pattern.
Let's take a look at
the Factory Method Pattern.
The Factory Method Pattern approaches
the creation of specific types
of objects in a different way.
Instead of using a separate object,
a Factory Object to create the objects.
The Factory Method uses a separate method
in a same class to create the objects.
You're going to see that the power of
the Factory Method comes from the way it
creates specific knife products.
To create specialized product objects,
a Factory Object approach which
would sub class the factory class.
For example, a subclass of our
KnifeFactory, called BudgetKnifeFactory,
could create uBdgetChefsKnives, and
BudgetSteakKnife product objects.
A QualityKnifeFactory could creat
QualityChefsKnife objects, or
QualitSteakKnife product objects.
A Factory Method approach instead has a
budget knife store subclass of KnifeStore,
the budget KnifeStore has a method.
The Factory Method that is responsible for
creating BudgetChefsKnife and
BudgetSteakKnife product objects instead.
The Factory Method design intent is to
define and interface for creating objects,
but let the subclasses decide
which class to instantiate.
What does this look like?
Let's look at the KnifeStore
superclass first.
First of all, KnifeStore is now abstract.
This means we cannot
instantiate a KnifeStore.
Instead, you will need to have KnifeStore
subclasses, such as budget KnifeStore or
quality KnifeStore.
These subclasses will inherit
the same order knife method.
It is declared in the super class,
but it's abstract and empty.
We left the Factory Method empty and
called it abstract,
because we want the Factory Method
to be defined by the subclasses.
Whenever a KnifeStore subclass is defined,
it must define this createKnife method.
Let's take a look at what
a KnifeStore subclass looks like.
Now you would instantiate
a BudgetKnifeStore.
The BudgetKnifeStore has its own
method for creating knife objects.
A different knife store such as
QualityKnifeStore would have a different
Factory Method.
You can't define a new KnifeStore
subclass without providing this method.
Because the BudgetKnifeStore
is a subclass of KnifeStore,
it inherits the orderKnife method.
You run the common orderKnife method
from any subclass of KnifeStore.
All the subclasses of KnifeStore,
BudgetKnifeStore, QualityKnifeStore,
maybe FamilyKnifeStore,
inherit the orderKnife method.
However, each subclass must define
its own create knife method.
Let's take at the UML class diagram for
one KnifeStore.
The UML class diagram gives you
some important information.
First of all both Knife and KnifeStore
are italicized to denote abstract classes.
You cannot instantiate these
classes directly you must define
subclasses of them.
The UML diagram shows only one subclass
of knife but there could be more.
BudgetChefsKnife, BudgetParingKnife, etc.
We could also have more than one
KnifeStore, maybe QualityKnifeStore or
FamilyKnifeStore which would
make other types of knives.
The createKnife method is
also abstract in KnifeStore.
This means that any subclass of
KnifeStore must define this method.
So BudgetKnifeStore and
any other KnifeStore subclass we define
must have its own createKnife method.
This is the core of
the Factory Method design pattern.
The Factory Method pattern always
follows the same general structure.
Let's check out the UML class diagram.
We have an abstract creator class.
This class contains methods that
only operate on generalization.
In other words, as long as we give these
methods the products they want to operate
on, they're happy.
In our example,
the product was knife, the creator also
declares the Factory Method abstractly.
So that each concrete creator class is
obliged to provide a Factory Method.
The concrete creator is a subclass
of the abstract, creator.
We call it a concrete creator, because it
is responsible for concrete instantiation.
The actual act of creating objects.
The concrete creator also inherits
methods from the abstract method.
Factory Method is a method in
our concrete creator subclass.
Everytime the developer adds a concrete
creator subclass to the design.
They must define a factory method
to make the right products.
This is how the subclass
decides how to create objects.
The product superclass which
was knife in our example
generalizes the concrete products.
As far as the creator class is concerned,
it's methods only operate on the general
product never the concrete products.
The concrete products are made
by the Concrete Creator.
The type of product made is decided
by which CCcreator is made.
In our example, the BudgetKnifeStore made
BudgetChefsKnife and BudgetSteakKnife.
Well the QualityKnifeStore can make
QualityChefsKnife or QualitySteakKnife.
In this lesson, we cover
the Factory Method, the design pattern and
Factory Object.
A Factory is generally a method or
an object that allows you
to create other objects.
Remember that the active object creation
usually with a new keyword in Java
is called concrete instantiation.
Factories allow client code to
operate on generalizations,
this is called coding to an interface,
not an implementation.
As long as the client code receives the
object it expects, a knife in our example.
It can satisfy its responsibilities
without worrying about the details of
object creation.
A Factory Object may be a useful tool It
is an object that creates other objects.
It can be useful if many parts of the
software want to create the same objects.
You can even create specialized factories
by having subclasses of the factory class.
The Factory Method Pattern
is a little bit different.
Instead of using another
object to create objects,
we separate out object creation into
another method, a Factory Method.
Now, instead of working with
the Factory Object, we specialize or
subclass the class that
uses the Factory Method.
Each subclass must define
it's own Factory Method.
We say that we are letting the subclasses
decide how objects are made.
By separating the actual object creation
from other behavior using factories,
the code becomes cleaner to read and
easier to maintain or change.
The client code is simplified and
the details of object creation
are moved into the factories.
The code becomes more extensible and
harnesses the power of object oriented
design principles, such as inheritance,
to allow you to specialize
your object creation.